SOURCE: https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/billTextClient.xhtml?bill_id=202520260SB1160#94CHP
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-03 22:10 UTC

Senate Bill

 No. 1160

 CHAPTER 681

 An act to add Chapter 2.15 (commencing with Section 68652) to Title 8 of the Government Code, relating to courts. 

 [
 Approved by

 Governor
 September 27, 2026.

 Filed with

 Secretary of State
 September 27, 2026.
 ]

LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL'S DIGEST

SB 1160, Durazo.
 Judicial Council: eviction data reporting.

The California Constitution establishes the Judicial Council, and requires the Judicial Council to adopt rules for court administration, practice, and procedure, and to undertake certain responsibilities with regard to court facilities.

Existing law regulates the terms and conditions of residential tenancies. Existing law, after a tenant has continuously and lawfully occupied a residential real property for 12 months, prohibits the owner of the residential real property from terminating the tenancy without just cause and requires that just cause to be stated in the written notice to terminate tenancy. Under existing law, a tenant is guilty of unlawful detainer if the tenant continues to possess the property without permission of the landlord after the tenant defaults on rent, among other reasons.

This
 bill would, by July 1, 2032, require the Judicial Council to assess the timeline by which each county court system has the ability to submit specified data points regarding unlawful detainer cases to the Judicial Council utilizing an automated data collection system. The bill would, beginning January 1,
 2033, require each county court system identified by the Judicial Council as able to report to the Judicial Council utilizing the automated data collection system to submit the specified data points to the Judicial Council on a quarterly basis, aggregated by ZIP Code. The bill would require, on or before January 1, 2034, all county court systems to report the identified data points to the Judicial Council utilizing
 the automated data collection system on a quarterly basis, aggregated by ZIP Code of the premises that is the subject of the action. The bill would require, beginning January 1, 2034, and annually thereafter, the Judicial Council to format the information received pursuant to the provisions above in an electronic spreadsheet, as specified, and to publicly post the spreadsheet on its internet website. The bill would make implementation of its provisions contingent upon appropriation by the Legislature, as specified.

Digest Key

 Vote:
 MAJORITY 
 Appropriation:
 NO 
 Fiscal Committee:
 YES 
 Local Program:
 NO 

Bill Text

The people of the State of California do enact as follows:

SECTION 1.
 Chapter 2.15 (commencing with Section 68652) is added to Title 8 of the Government Code, immediately following Chapter 2.1 (commencing with Section 68650), to read:

 CHAPTER
 2.15. Eviction Proceedings

68652. (a) By July 1, 2032, the Judicial Council shall assess the timeline by which each county court system shall have the ability to submit the following data points to the Judicial Council for unlawful detainer cases utilizing an automated data collection system:

(1) Cases filed each month.

(2) Cases that were subject to default, stipulated, and other types of pretrial and posttrial judgments.

(3) Cases that were dismissed at the plaintiff’s request or by order of the court.

(b) (1) Beginning January 1, 2033, county court systems identified by the Judicial Council as able to report to the Judicial Council utilizing
 the automated data collection system shall submit the data points specified in subdivision (a) on a quarterly basis, aggregated by ZIP Code of the premises that is the subject of the action.

(2) On or before January 1, 2034, all county court systems shall report the data points specified in subdivision (a) to the Judicial Council utilizing the automated data collection system on a quarterly basis, aggregated by ZIP Code of the premises that is the subject of the
 action.

(c) Beginning January 1, 2034, and annually thereafter, the Judicial Council shall format the information received pursuant to subdivision (b) in an electronic spreadsheet and shall publicly post the spreadsheet on its internet website. The data shall be formatted as follows:

(1) The data in the electronic spreadsheet shall be aggregated by ZIP Code.

(2) Notwithstanding paragraph (1), if any county had an average of 100 or fewer unlawful detainer case filings during the previous five fiscal years, that county’s data shall only be
 provided in the electronic spreadsheet at the county level.

68653. Implementation of this chapter shall be contingent upon appropriation of sufficient funding by the Legislature in the annual Budget Act or other statute for that purpose.
